# Building skill with practice

## Objectives

+ Compare and contrast the three stages of skill acquisition (novice, 
intermediate, expert)
+ Apply a concept map to explore a simple mental model
+ Understand the limitations of knowledge in the absence of a functional mental 
model
+ Create a formative assessment to diagnose a broken mental model
+ Apply strategies to meet students where they are

## Overview

We will now get started with a discussion of how learning works. We will begin 
with some key concepts from educational research and identify how these 
principles can be put into practice for data science and data literacy in the 
classroom.

## Pedagogical model

For our purposes, we are going to focus on showing students how to solve 
specific problems with specific tools and providing hands-on practice. This 
serves to develop students' confidence and lay the foundation for future 
learning.

A critical component of this process is that students are able to practice what 
they are learning in real time, get feedback on what they are doing, and then 
apply those lessons learned to the next step in the learning process. Having 
students help each other also helps to reinforce the germane concepts.

Ideally we make these experiences interactive events for students and 
instructors. We give and receive feedback throughout the course of an 
instructional session. We incorporate assessments within the lesson materials 
and ask for feedback as part of the class session.

For many of your students, this may be their very first exposure to the skill 
or tool that you are teaching. Because of this, the material you present is not 
simply a source of information; it is the starting point for the development of 
a new skill. With this in mind, we will explore what research tells us about 
skills acquisition and development of a "mental model."

## Skills acquisition

When we think about developing skills, we can use a model where students 
advance through three different stages: novice, intermediate, and expert. This 
model is a simplification of the [Dreyfus model of skill acquisition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dreyfus_model_of_skill_acquisition).

+ Novice: someone who does not know what they do not know, i.e., they do not 
yet know what the key ideas in the domain are or how they relate. Novices may 
have difficulty formulating questions, or may ask questions that seem 
irrelevant or off-topic as they rely on prior knowledge, without knowing what 
is or is not related yet.
    + Example: A novice might never have heard the R programming language, and 
    therefore may have no understanding of how it can be used to perform 
    analyses and automate tasks.
+ Intermediate (AKA a competent practitioner): someone who has enough 
understanding for everyday purposes. They will not know all the details of how 
something works and their understanding may not be entirely accurate, but it is 
sufficient for completing normal tasks with normal effort under normal 
circumstances.
    + Example: An intermediate might have used the R programming language 
    before and understand how to modify existing code and write short scripts.
+ Expert: someone who can easily handle situations that are out of the 
ordinary.
    + Example: An expert may have experience their own functions in R and using 
    them in complex workflows. When presented with a problem, immediately sees 
    how these skills can be used to solve the problem.

**Exercise** In the collaborative document, add the name of someone you think 
of as an expert. They don't have to be in your field, just someone who as 
acquired enough skill to qualify as an expert as we just defined. After their 
name, explain _why_ they are an expert.

Note that how a person _feels_ about their skill level is not included in these 
definitions! You may or may not consider yourself an expert in a particular 
subject, but may nonetheless function at that level in certain contexts. For 
now, we are primarily concerned with novices, as this is often the level 
students are encountering data science applications.

It is common to think of a novice as a sort of an "empty vessel" into which 
knowledge can be "poured." Unfortunately, this analogy includes inaccuracies 
that can generate dangerous misconceptions. In our next section, we will 
briefly explore the nature of "knowledge" through a concept that helps us 
differentiate between novices and intermediates in a more useful and visual 
way. This, in turn, will have implications for how we teach.

## Mental models

Understanding is never a mirror of reality, even for an expert; rather, it is 
an internal representation based on our experience with a subject. This 
internal representation is often described as a mental model. A mental model 
allows us to extrapolate, or make predictions beyond and between the narrow 
limits of experience and memory, filling in gaps to the point that things 
"make sense."

As we learn, our mental model evolves to become more complex and, most 
importantly, more useful. A useful model makes reasonable predictions and fits 
well within the range of things we are likely to encounter. While there will 
always be inaccuracies – or "misconceptions" – these do not interfere with 
day-to-day functioning. A useful model does not seize up or break down entirely 
as new concepts are added.

A mental model may be represented as a collection of concepts and facts, 
connected by relationships. The mental model of an expert in any given subject 
will be far larger and more complex than that of a novice, including both more 
concepts and more detailed and numerous relationships.

A more general tool that is useful for exploring any network of concepts and 
relationships is a concept map. A concept map asks you to identify which 
concepts are most relevant to a topic at hand and – critically – to identify 
how they are connected. It can be quite difficult to identify and organize 
these connections! However, the process of forcing abstract knowledge into a 
visual format can force you to name connections that you might otherwise have 
quietly assumed, or illuminate gaps that you may not have been aware of. 

**TODO**: Need a better example of a concept map. Could try a simplified 
version of the carbon cycle (or photorespiration). Need something than can 
represent at _broken_ mental model.

**Exercise** Draw a concept map for a mental model of something you teach. 
**TODO**: This needs more detail. Folks need guidance on what a mental model 
and concept map would be.

## Misconceptions

**TODO**: Describe the chosen mental model above. Provide example of how it can 
be broken.

When mental models break, learning can occur more slowly than you might expect. 
The longer a prior model was in use, and the more extensively it has to be 
unlearned, the more it can actively interfere with the incorporation of new 
knowledge. Our students may quickly adapt to this new information if they had 
never thought much about (_describe model here_) before and were simply trying 
out an existing mental model on a new situation. However, if they had extensive 
experience with (_describe model here_), it may take longer to unlearn what 
they thought they understood about (_reference model here_).

Most mental models worth mapping are not so simple. Yet, forcing complex ideas 
in to this simplified format can be useful when preparing to teach, because it 
forces you to be explicit about exactly what concepts are at the heart of your 
topic, and to name relationships between them.

**Exercise** Count the number of things in your concept map (lines and items) 
and add that number to the collaborative document.

## Formative assessments

In order to effectively root out pre-existing misconceptions that need to be 
un-learned and stop quietly developing misconceptions in their tracks, we need 
to be actively and persistently looking for them. But how?

Like so many challenges we will discuss in this training, the answer is 
**feedback**. In this case, we want feedback that allows us to assess the 
developing mental model of a student in highly specific ways, to verify that 
learning is proceeding according to plan and not careening off in some 
unpredicted direction. We want to get this feedback while we teach so that we 
can respond to that information and adapt our instruction to get students back 
on track.

This kind of assessment has a name: it is called formative assessment because 
it is applied during learning to form the practice of teaching and the 
experience of the student. This is different from exams, for example, which sum 
up what a participant has learned but are not used to guide further progress 
and are hence called summative.

Feedback from formative assessment illuminates misconceptions for both 
instructors and students. It also provides reassurance on both sides when 
learning is proceeding on track. It is far more reliable than reading faces or 
using feelings of comfort as a metric, which tends to be what instructors and 
students default to otherwise.

Formative assessments can serve many purposes other than hunting down 
misconceptions, such as verifying engagement or supporting memory 
consolidation. We will discuss some of these functions in later on. In this 
section, we are interested quite narrowly in evaluating mental models.

One example of formative assessment that can be used to tease out 
misconceptions is the multiple choice question (MCQ). When designed carefully, 
these can target anticipated misconceptions with surgical precision. For 
example, suppose we are teaching children multi-digit addition. A well-designed 
MCQ would be:

Q: what is 27 + 15 ?
a) 42
b) 32
c) 312
d) 33

The correct answer is (a) 42, but the other answers provide information.

**Exercise** Choose one wrong answer and write in the collaborative document 
what misconception is associated with that wrong answer.

**Solution**

+ If the student answers 32, they forgot to carry the 1 to the tens place.
+ If they answer 312, they know that they cannot just discard the carried 1, 
but do not understand that it is actually a ten and needs to be added into the 
next column. In other words, they are treating each column of numbers as 
unconnected to its neighbors.
+ If they answer 33 then they know they have to carry the 1, but are carrying 
it back into the same column it came from.

Each of these incorrect answers has diagnostic power Each answer looks like it 
could be right. Silly answers like "a fish!" may offer therapeutic comedy but 
do not provide insight; nor do answers that are wrong in random ways. 
"Diagnostic power" means that each of the wrong choices helps the instructor 
figure out precisely what misconceptions students have adopted when they 
select that choice.

**Exercise** Consider your concept map and write a multiple choice question to 
identify points where the mental model represented might be broken.

## Going slow

It takes work to actively assess mental models throughout a class; this also 
takes time. This can make instructors feel conflicted about using formative 
assessment routinely because it may seem like wasted time or busywork.

If our goal is to help novices students construct an accurate and useful mental 
model of a new intellectual domain, this will impact our teaching. For example, 
we principally want to help students form the right categories and make 
connections among concepts. We _do not_ want to overload them with a slew of 
unrelated facts, as this will be confusing.

An important practical implication of this latter point is the pace of 
teaching. Learning consists of more than "just" adding information to mental 
models; creating linkages between concepts and facts is at least as important. 
Making sure to teach at a pace that allows reflection and reinforcement of 
those linkages it critical for students' progress.

## Expertise

We talked about the transition from novice to intermediate through formation of 
a functional mental model. We now shift our attention to experts. This means 
you.

We will discuss how being an expert can make it more difficult to teach 
novices, and some tools to help instructors identify and overcome these 
difficulties.

**Exercise** What is something that _you_ are an expert in? How does your 
experience when you are acting as an expert differ from when you are not an 
expert?

Because your students' mental models will likely be less densely connected than 
your own, a conclusion that seems obvious to you will not seem that way to your 
students. It is important to explain what you are doing step-by-step, and how 
each step leads to the next one.

### Any Questions?

Another well-intended move that can go wrong is the call for questions. An 
instructor may accidentally dismiss student confusion by asking for questions 
in a way that reveals that they do not actually expect that anyone will have 
them. Asking, "Does anyone have any questions?" or "Do you all understand?" 
implies that most people will not; the shorter the wait time before moving on, 
the more this implication is magnified. Instead, consider asking "What 
questions do you have?" and leaving a healthy pause for consideration. This 
firmly establishes an expectation that people will, indeed, have questions, and 
should challenge themselves to formulate them.

**TODO**: End of day feedback

***

Materials based on [Carpentries Instructor Training](https://carpentries.github.io/instructor-training/).

<img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0" src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by/4.0/88x31.png" />

These instructional materials are licensed under [CC-BY 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
