# Memory and cognitive load

## Objectives

+ Remember the quantitative limit of human memory
+ Distinguish between desirable and undesirable cognitive load
+ Evaluate cognitive load associated with a learning task
+ Create a formative assessment that maximizes germane cognitive load

## Overview

In this section, we will be learning more about human memory and how our this
understanding can help in effective teaching strategies. Specifically, how to 
remove unnecessary "load" in order to facilitate learning.

Learning involves memory. For our purposes, human memory can be divided into 
two different layers. The first is called long-term. It is where we store 
persistent information like our friends' names and our home address. It is 
essentially unbounded (barring injury or disease, we will die before it fills 
up) but it is slow to access.

Our second layer of memory is called short-term. This is the type of memory you 
use to actively think about things and is often called working memory. It is 
much faster, but also much smaller: like about 7 +/- 2 things! This is why 
phone numbers are typically 7 or 8 digits long: back when phones had dials 
instead of keypads, that was the longest sequence of numbers most adults could 
remember accurately for as long as it took the dial to go around and around.

If we present our students with large amounts of information, without giving 
them the opportunity to practice using it (and thereby transfer it into 
long-term memory), they will not retain the material as well as if we present 
small amounts of information interspersed with practice opportunities. This is 
yet another reason why going slowly and using frequent formative assessment is 
important.

**Exercise** This website implements a short test of working memory: 
[https://miku.github.io/activememory/](https://miku.github.io/activememory/). 
Take the test and, if you are comfortable, share your answer in the 
collaborative document.

## Strategies for memory management

Because short-term memory is limited, we can support students by not flooding 
their short term memory with too many separate pieces of information. Does this 
mean we should teach fewer concepts? Yes! However, this is not the _only_ 
approach to use. We can also assist by providing strategies and exercises to 
help them form the connections that will (a) support them in holding more 
things in short-term memory at once and (b) begin to consolidate some concepts, 
moving them into long-term memory.

**Formative assessment** is a key component in helping students solidify their 
understanding and begin transferring ideas into long-term memory. Why? Because 
it engages the brain in retrieving recently-learned information and actively 
applying it to solve a problem. This helps to both reinforce and connect that 
new information in useful ways.

The limitations of short-term memory are one reason why assessments should be 
frequent: short-term memory is limited not only in space, but also in time. If 
you wait too long before deploying a formative assessment, some of the 
information necessary to complete the task will already be forgotten. This time 
window can be very short, especially if a lot of content is being taught at 
once. Be sure to remind students about prior concepts essential to a task.

Elaboration, or explaining your work, supports transfer to long-term memory. 
This is one reason why teaching is one of the most effective ways to learn! 
**Group work** can feel uncomfortable at first and consumes time in class, 
but students often rate group work as a high point for both enjoyment and 
learning.

**Reflection** is another tool that can help students review things they have 
learned, strengthen connections between them, and consolidate long-term 
memories. Like formative assessment, asking students for feedback can double as 
both a source of information and an effective consolidating prompt, as 
providing feedback demands some reflection on what has been learned. We will 
talk more about methods for this in the next section. You may also wish to 
pause and allow learners to write summary notes for themselves or otherwise ask 
them to review what they have learned at various points in the class session.

In the same vein as "going slowly," it is important to **limit the number of 
concepts** introduced in a class. This can be hard! As you are reviewing a 
lesson to teach, you will doubtless come across related concepts that are very 
useful, and you may feel strongly motivated to sneak them in. Planning your 
lesson with a concept map can help you not only identify key concepts and 
relationships, but also to notice when you are trying to teach too many things 
at once.

**Exercise**
**TODO**: An exercise about memory management

## Attention is a limited resource: Cognitive Load

Memory is not the only cognitive resource that is limited. Attention is 
constrained as well, which can limit the information that enters short term 
memory in the first place as well as interfere with attempts at consolidation. 
While many people believe that they can "multi-task," the reality is that 
attention can only focus on one thing at a time. Adding items that demand 
attention adds more things to alternate between attending to, which can reduce 
efficiency and performance on all of them.

### The Theory of Cognitive Load

There are different theories of cognitive load, but for our purposes, we will 
consider three things that students have in their heads while learning.

    1. Things they have to think about in order to perform a task 
    ("intrinsic").
    2. Mental effort required to connect the task to new and old information 
    ("germane").
    3. Distractions and other mental effort not directly related to performing 
    or learning from the task ("extraneous").

Cognitive load is not always a bad thing! There is plenty of evidence that some 
difficulty is desirable and can increase learning. However, there are limits. 
Managing all forms of cognitive load, with particular attention to extraneous 
load, can help prevent cognitive overload from impeding learning altogether.

One way to manage cognitive load as tasks become more complex is by using 
guided practice: creating a structure that narrowly guides focus on specific 
skills and knowledge in a stepped fashion, with feedback at each step before 
transferring attention to a new feature.

### Attention management

The choices you make as an instructor may add to or subtract from your 
students' cognitive load. Supporting memory consolidation can reduce load later 
on in the class, as it reduces the effort of recalling forgotten material. You 
can also minimize cognitive load by choosing formative assessments that are 
narrowly focused and by considering potential distractions in what you display 
during instruction.

There are many different types of exercises that can focus attention narrowly 
and help to avoid cognitive overload. Carefully targeted multiple choice 
questions can play this role. A few more that you may wish to consider are:

+ Faded examples: worked examples with targeted details "faded" out - 
essentially fill-in-the-blank programming blocks
+ Parson's Problems: out-of-order code selection & sorting challenges
+ Labeling diagrams or flow charts

**TODO**: Add examples, perhaps in the form of images, for each of these 
types of examples.

Beware assessments that are too open-ended, as these are very likely to induce 
cognitive overload in novices. You may have experienced some overload already 
when you were asked to create a concept map; this is why we do not recommend 
these as an activity for novices. Questions that ask students to both remember 
and synthesize or reason with new information are also risky. If you try out a 
question and get a room filled with silence, you may need an icebreaker, you 
may need to re-teach... or you may only need a more narrowly focused question.

**Exercise**
**TODO**: An exercise about congitive load or attention management. Maybe ask 
for one of the exercises (Faded example, Parson's problem, labeling diagram) on 
their concept map?

**TODO**: Add homework here. Perhaps being prepared to create learning 
objectives from one of their own classes

**Feedback** Doing one-up-down? Have Google form for anonymous feedback.

***

Materials based on [Carpentries Instructor Training](https://carpentries.github.io/instructor-training/).

<img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0" src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by/4.0/88x31.png" />

These instructional materials are licensed under [CC-BY 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
